And welcome to this special session of
the Executive Sport Management Training
Level 1 as part of Module 4,
Management of Sport Organizations.
We're honored to be joined today by a
distinguished guest, Mr.
Maradza Russell Mhiribidi,
Presidents of the Sport Leaders Institute
of Zimbabwe.
OK, my name is Gonzalo Bravo.
I'm a professor of sport management in
the School of Sport Science at West
Virginia University.
For the past 20 years,
I have the privilege of teaching sport
management courses and conducting
research focus on global sport governance,
policy and leadership.
It's truly a pleasure to moderate this
important conversations as part of our
training initiative.
Mr.
Mhiribidi has been a leading figure in
sport development in Zimbabwe,
bringing with him a wealth of experience
in designing and delivering training
programs for sport professionals.
His leadership has been instrumental in
shaping the sport landscape in Zimbabwe
and others.
Valuable insights for the broader African
context and beyond.
We're truly grateful for the opportunity
to hear from him today and to learn more
about the challenges and opportunities
facing the sport management across the
continent.
Thank you for joining us, Mr.
Mhiribidi.
OK, so let's let's begin.
So could you share a bit about your
personal and professional background?
OK,
What inspired you to create the Sport
Leadership Institute of Zimbabwe and what
are some of the projects you are
currently involved in?
Oh, thank you very much,
Professor Gonzalo.
It's always a pleasure to talk to you
about sports management globally.
To begin with,
let me just start by saying I started
being involved in sport at school level
prime both primary and high school.
And I started being more involved and I
was exposed to proper coaching at high
school where I did a lot of track and
field in terms of athletics.
And then I played a lot of basketball and
and rugby.
And my major sport then after high school
was basketball which I played at all
levels in our country.
And I also managed to coach and manage
the national teams I then went to.
For my education, I did the diploma,
University of Zimbabwe Diploma in
Physical Education and Sports where I was
trained to teach in high schools.
I taught there for a couple of years and
then advanced my education with a
bachelor's degree in physical education
and sports and Sports Science.
That is when I then after completion of
that,
I joined the Sports and Recreation
Commission of Zimbabwe,
which is the supreme governing board of
sports in Zimbabwe where I went as
provisional manager right up to regional
manager and regional director.
I then left the Sports and Recreation
Commission and then started the Sports
Leaders Institute of Zimbabwe and that
was in 2008.
That's when we started the Sports and
Leaders Institute of Zimbabwe.
What made us start the Sports Leaders
Institute of Zimbabwe was the fact that
we we realized that there was a gap when
it came to the career development pathway
of the sports administrator as opposed to
the technical official where everything
is clearly laid out like a piece of cake
by the international federations when it
comes to sports management.
It was neglected especially in Zimbabwe
and the continent of Africa.
So we saw a gap and that saw the best of
the Sports Leaders Institute of Zimbabwe
where we decided that we could come up
with programs that would enhance and make
our sports managers,
sports administrators as more efficient
in terms of running sport in Zimbabwe,
in Africa.
Excellent, excellent.
So I mean, you,
you have mentioned about that there,
there is a gap right, in terms of the,
the, the, the preparations,
the training of a sport, you know,
managers or people who will be running
sports organizations, clubs, you know,
and and so forth, you know,
in the country.
So based on your experience with the
Sport Leadership Institute of Zimbabwe,
what skills,
knowledge or type of experience are most
lacking among sports professional in
Zimbabwe today?
Where do you see the greatest need for
capacity building?
I think with the with our existence for
more than 10 years ago,
the landscape has changed a little bit.
But in the beginning, there was a lot,
lot of games when it came to issues to do
with planning,
organizing and managing sport clubs,
sport federations in managing teams.
So we we,
we felt that we could come in and close
that gap by way of running the short
courses,
short sports management camps where we
sports leaders from across the divide
would come and learn in a very relaxed
atmosphere where they would not be
subjected to rigorous examinations,
but just being reminded of the basic
fundamentals of running sport.
So yeah, that that is what we saw.
Perfect, perfect, perfect.
Let me just turn a little bit, you know,
the the conversation now and talk a
little bit about the challenges, you know,
in the region, you know,
the sports systems across Africa face a
variety of challenges, right?
From your perspective,
what are some of the most pressing issues
affecting the development of the sports
not only in Zimbabwe but across the
region?
I think one of the worst things that I've
realized in my country and across the
continent is that our sports leaders and
our sports teams and everyone in sports,
they want to do well in sport,
but they don't want to do sport well.
And by that I mean,
that's a great way to to say it.
Yeah, yes.
They don't want to do it well because
they don't want to apply the right basic
fundamentals of running sports in terms
of sport management,
which is obviously if you look at the
cycle where you deal with planning,
organizing, controlling,
implementing and evaluation,
they would rather control in the system
so that they win.
The winning is what they look for.
They're not looking at the right basic
growth, organic growth of the athlete,
basic organic growth of the sports
management ecosystem.
So that is a challenge when people are
more into the way,
people are more interested in titles
other than the work that they're supposed
to do.
So we believe that the African sports
leader needs a lot more knowledge so that
they become knowledgeable about what they
are doing.
And once we do that,
I believe we will write,
we will strike the record like we are
beginning to do right now.
I think we are very happy and it's all
thanks to efforts from organizers like
the Sports Leaders Institute of Zimbabwe,
the Africa Sports Management Association
in various Olympic and sport movements
that have now put education at the
forefront so that people are able to
understand the product that they are
dealing with.
Perfect, perfect.
Let's talk a little bit about strategic
partnerships,
right so partnerships often play a
critical role in advancing sport.
What roles do partnerships whether this
is our private sector,
governments or international
organizations play in the strategic
planning and developing of the sport
Leaders is Institute of Zimbabwe is a
sports leadership of Zimbabwe don't
operate in a vacuum and neither if we
reinvented anything,
we are just there to refine once already
existing and add a little bit of what we
can add to that.
And as you everyone is aware in any
country there are laws of the land that
one must apply to.
So it's entails that we engage with
government ministry like we are a private
NGO operating within the national sports
development policy of Zimbabwe.
So it is very important that we create
this strategic partnerships that we
understand and appreciate the different
roles that the private sector,
the government,
the local authorities and of course even
the educational institutions like
colleges and universities that offer
sporting education play.
So that at the end of the day will not
abuse very little resource that we have
in terms of applying and using what we
already have in terms when it comes to
sport development education.
So it's very important from a slit
perspective that we all work together and
remember sport is always been and will
always be a team issue and effort.
Right?
No, Excellent.
So let's talk a little bit about the
future, right?
Looking ahead,
what are the top priorities for the Sport
Leaders Institute of Zimbabwe over the
next five years?
Where do you see the greatest
opportunities for growth and innovation
is the Sports Leaders Institute of
Zimbabwe?
We see with what has been happening,
the partnerships that we've created,
especially the one with West Virginia
University that we're talking about.
We are looking at creating a group global
sports leader who's able to exist and
operate effectively and efficiently
within the global sporting management
landscape.
And we are very excited that we are in
the right direction.
And with this program that is coming up,
we certainly believe that this is going
to be a game changer that is going to
make everyone confident because where you
have knowledge, you are confident.
Mr.
Mhiribidi,
thank you very much for your thoughtful
reflections and for sharing your
experiences with us today.
Your insights offer a valuable
perspective on the management of sport in
Zimbabwe and across the African continent
more broadly.
To our participants,
I hope this conversations has deepened
your understanding of how national sport
institutions operate, you know,
and the challenges that faces, you know,
not only organizations in Zimbabwe,
but across the regions, you know,
and the kind of leadership,
collaborations and innovation required to
advance sport systems, you know,
in complex environments.
Once again, Mr.
Mhiribidi ,
thank you for your time and for being
part of this important dial.
Thank you.
And I'd left one thing,
Prof I also looking at in terms of
innovation.
We also looking at at the Zimbabwean and
African sports leader using AI for more
informed business insights and decision
making.
And we want to use the digital space a
little bit more so that we all work in
tandem with the Global Rd.
Remember,
the road has become one global village
because of AII.
Thank you very much for having me here
and all the place.
Thank you, Thank you very much.
Thank you.